---
title: "A machine learning approach for early identification of patients with severe imported malaria"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2015-02-13-malaria
excerpt: ''
date: 2023-02-13
venue: 'Malaria Journal'
# slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides3.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12936-024-04869-3'
# citation: 'Your Name, You. (2015). &quot;Paper Title Number 3.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(3).'
---

### Background
The aim of this study is to design ad hoc malaria learning (ML) approaches to predict clinical outcome in all patients with imported malaria and, therefore, to identify the best clinical setting.

### Methods
This is a single-centre cross-sectional study, patients with confirmed malaria, consecutively hospitalized to the Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for Infectious Diseases, Rome, Italy from January 2007 to December 2020, were recruited. Different ML approaches were used to perform the analysis of this dataset: support vector machines, random forests, feature selection approaches and clustering analysis.

### Results
A total of 259 patients with malaria were enrolled, 89.5% patients were male with a median age of 39 y/o. In 78.3% cases, Plasmodium falciparum was found. The patients were classified as severe malaria in 111 cases. From ML analyses, four parameters, AST, platelet count, total bilirubin and parasitaemia, are associated to a negative outcome. Interestingly, two of them, aminotransferase and platelet are not included in the current list of World Health Organization (WHO) criteria for defining severe malaria.

### Conclusion
In conclusion, the application of ML algorithms as a decision support tool could enable the clinicians to predict the clinical outcome of patients with malaria and consequently to optimize and personalize clinical allocation and treatment.